docs: healer controller design proposal (#94)
csi-addons/kubernetes-csi-addons: docs/design/proposals/healer-controller.md

# Details

                    .-------------------.
                    |     CSI-Addons    |
                    | Healer Controller |
                    '-------------------'
                              |
                              | gRPC
                              |
            .---------+------------------------------.
            |         |                              |
            |  .------------.        .------------.  |
            |  | CSI-Addons |  gRPC  |    CSI     |  |
            |  |  side-car  |--------| NodePlugin |  |
            |  '------------'        '------------'  |
            | CSI-driver Pod                         |
            '----------------------------------------'

## CSI-Addons Healer Controller
* The healer controller will be implemented as part of the CSI-Addons controller. It will trigger controller RPC to check the health condition of the CSI volumes.
* Watch for the `CSIAddonsNode` object, if the object is created/modified by the side-car do below operations

>     * Fetch all the VolumeAttachment` list

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * Wait for connection to be established and determine if `VolumeHeal` capability is present. (steps similar to this)
    * Fetch all the VolumeAttachment` list
```
After CSIAddons controller connects to the driver, It'll fetch and stores its capabilities. 
We can use that capabilities list to determine whether `volumeheal` cap is present or not and then proceed further.

Author: Yes, this is right. I will capture it, I just took this for granted.

    * Filter the `VolumeAttachment` list through matching driver name, node name and status attached

>     * For each `VolumeAttachment` get the respective PersistentVolume information and check the criteria of PersistentVolume Bound (also we can have configuration options like mounter type)

Reviewer: Send request irrespective of any particular PV config option ?
Or
let the driver include more information in its capabilities response, so this decision can be made with the help of the extra info provided by the driver itself ?

Author: My idea is similar to the latter one, somehow get the choice like, what kind of mounter types need what services.
Example:
```
{
  rbd-nbd: healing
  krbd: monitoring
  xyz: disable
}
```

Author: I would like to leave this more for an implementation-specific detail.

Reviewer 2: CSI-Addons capabilities from a CSI-driver should include if it supports healing a volume. If the CSI-driver does not need healing, it can omit the capability.
In case the CSI-driver needs to perform heal checks on a volume (depending on the volume options?), it can either return things like `HEALTH_OK` (to recheck later), `HEALTH_UNSUPPORTED` (no need to check, this volume does not support healing), `HEALTH_BAD` (needs healing) and so on. But this is a discussion for csi-addons/spec.

Reviewer 2: CSI-Addons should not need to know about different _mounter types_, that would require extending the list of types and the implementation for each CSI-driver. Better have a generic approach that works for all CSI-drivers, so that any CSI-driver can opt-in without changing CSI-Addons itself.

Author: This sounds reasonable.

`HEALTH_OK`, `HEALTH_UNSUPPORTED`, `HEALTH_BAD` are some kind of volume attributes that CSI driver sets on the persistent volume?

In my previous comment, I mean something like:
* capability response returns some string that holds
```
{
  Mounter1: NEED_HEALING
  Mounter2: NEED_MONITORING
  Mounter3: UNKNOWN
}
```
* If the PV attribute mounter matches with `Mounter1`, attempt to heal it.
* If it is of type `Mounter2` only check the health,
* If it is of type `Mounter3` do not attempt anything from the healer controller.

Reviewer 2: Interactions between CSI-Addons and the CSI-driver need to be documented in a [csi-addons/spec](https://github.com/csi-addons/spec). The protocol then describes what a CSI-driver needs to implement for supporting the healer operations. This will probably include a description for capabilities of the CSI-driver. Certain operations on a volume can return attributes that healing is not supported for the volume, but other volumes from the same driver might support more features.

I do not think CSI-Addons should know about internals of the CSI-driver, so _mounters_ would not be needed,

    * Send the RPC request for side-car to check if the volume is healthy along with the PersistentVolume details and may attempt to heal the volume if it is found abnormal
    * Log the final response returned from the side-car

## CSI-Addons side-car

> * When a nodeplugin container is restarted the side-car will update/create(if not present) [CSIAddonsNode](https://github.com/csi-addons/kubernetes-csi-addons/blob/main/api/v1alpha1/csiaddonsnode_types.go) object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* When a nodeplugin pod is restarted the side-car will create [CSIAddonsNode](https://github.com/csi-addons/kubernetes-csi-addons/blob/main/api/v1alpha1/csiaddonsnode_types.go) object.
```

When a pod is restarted, it essentially is deleted (which also deletes corresponding CSIAddonsNode object) and
a new pod is created (with new CSIAddonsNode object).

Author: Agree

* The side-car works as relay, upon receiving a gRPC call from healer controller, the CSI-Addons side-car will then check volume's mounting conditions collected via the CSI NodeGetVolumeStats RPC.

> * In case if any volume condition is reported abnormal, the CSI-Addons side-car will act on it, it does some internal operation like fetching secrets, constructing staging path and finally sends StageVolume request and finally returns back the response to the controller.

Reviewer: We agreed it will be a single call?
and let the driver decide and heal on its own?

Author: Yes, for the restart case only, send everything in one go.

    * Once the connection is established, fetch the capabilities list and check for nodes that supports `VOLUME_HEALER` capability
    * Fetch all the VolumeAttachment` list
    * Filter the `VolumeAttachment` list through matching driver name, node name and status attached
    * For each `VolumeAttachment` get the respective PersistentVolume information and check the criteria of PersistentVolume Bound (also we can have configuration options like mounter type)
    * Send the RPC request for side-car to check if the volume is healthy along with the PersistentVolume details and may attempt to heal the volume if it is found abnormal
    * Log the final response returned from the side-car

## CSI-Addons side-car
* When a nodeplugin pod is restarted the side-car will create [CSIAddonsNode](https://github.com/csi-addons/kubernetes-csi-addons/blob/main/api/v1alpha1/csiaddonsnode_types.go) object.
* The side-car works as relay, upon receiving a gRPC call from healer controller, the CSI-Addons side-car will then send a VolumeMonitor request to CSI driver. The request contains some internal details like secrets, staging path, volume-id etc.

> * Upon receiving the VolumeMonitor request, the CSI driver check volume's mounting conditions collected via the NodeGetVolumeStats RPC and in case if any volume condition is reported abnormal, it will act on it by performing required healing and finally returns back the response to the controller.

Reviewer: This is still a two step process ? 

The CSI-driver can itself simply determine if volume is healthy and just return ALL_OK or heal it if it is not.

> ## Add Controller Changes

Reviewer: I guess we can discuss rpc changes later on too.

# Introduction
There is [external health monitoring](https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/external-health-monitor/) which does mostly similar stuff, but actions are not in the scope of it, all it can do is log the health condition of the mounts.

# Volume Healer Controller

> Before we begin it is noteworthy to know that the existing healer logic remains the same.

Reviewer 2: what existing healer logic? there is none in this project

**Now the obvious question we expect is "what do we achieve with the new controller?"**

> * Moving the k8s specific code out of ceph-csi, to make ceph-csi orchestrator independent.

Reviewer 2: Use names of projects correctly, use Kubenetes, Ceph-CSI.

* Achieve a way to monitor the health of NBD volumes.

> * We currently do not have a way to act on failed/crashed NBD volumes with the existing healer logic. Once the controller detects that the volume is not healthy, it will have an opportunity to act on it.

Reviewer 2: Do not focus on NBD, it is just one example. Why would NBD be different from other block devices or mounters?

> * This will be a generic framework for any userspace mounters added in the future, example ceph-fuse

Reviewer 2: csi-addons is the framework! Phrase it differently, explain what the framework offers, and only after that describe an example with Ceph-CSI and rbd-nbb (and maybe mention that the healing is optional, e.g. krbd would not need it?)

# Details

                    .-------------------.
                    |     CSI-Addons    |
                    | Healer Controller |
                    '-------------------'
                              |
                              | gRPC
                              |
            .---------+------------------------------.
            |         |                              |
            |  .------------.        .------------.  |
            |  | CSI-Addons |  gRPC  |    CSI     |  |
            |  |  side-car  |--------| NodePlugin |  |
            |  '------------'        '------------'  |
            | CSI-driver Pod                         |
            '----------------------------------------'

## CSI-Addons Healer Controller

> * The healer controller will be implemented as part of the CSI-Addons controller driver. It is the one who triggers controller RPC to check the health condition of the CSI volumes.

Reviewer 2: just call it "CSI-Addons Controller".

"It is the new one" reads a little weird, obviously it is new if it will be implemented

Author: You read it wrong, I worded it as "It is the one" not "It is the new one"

> * Watch for the `CSIAddonsNode` object, if the object is created/modified by the side-car do below operations

Reviewer 2: why `CSIAddonsNode` and not `VolumeAttachment`? ideally use the same  formatting/capitalization for all Kuberenets objects

Author: `VolumeAttachment` is specific to a single volume, which is not our interest here. We should be watching for events that are at node level i.e. `CSIAddonsNode`

Volume level abnormalities should be taken care by the periodic healing checks.

Author: Ah! I realized what you meant now.

    * Fetch all the volume attachments (VA) list

>     * Filter the volume attachments list through matching driver name and status attached

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * Filter the volume attachments list through matching driver name, node name and status attached
    * Wait for status to be in connected state.
```
Only after csiaddonsnode is in connected state, connection object will be available in pool to be used.

Author: Why should we care about node names?

Reviewer: > Why should we care about node names?

you want to heals volume from that particular node where sidecar resides and got restarted ?

Author: Do we need to filter it? I think the event watcher lists the `CSIAddonsNode` object for Add/modify already, that should take care I guess?

>     * For each volume attachment get the respective PV information and check the criteria of PV Bound (also we can have configuration options like mounter type)

Reviewer 2: PV -> PersistentVolume, try to reduce abbreviations to make it better readable

What is "mounter type" here? The StorageClass, or CSI-driver internal parameters that CSI-Addons should not inspect?

Author: We want a way for users to provide global options/filters, I don't know yet what would be the right place to capture such specifications from users.

Still thinking about this part.

>     * Send the RPC request for side-car to check if the volume is healthy along with the PV details details

Reviewer 2: not only check, but heal as well?

    * Log the final response returned from the side-car

> * The healer controller periodically triggers the health status checks of the CSI volumes via the gRPC calls.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The healer controller periodically triggers the health status checks of the CSI volumes via the gRPC calls.
```
we should combine this functionality in the same controller and it requires a separate docs with explanation of which volumes should be watched, how and so on.

Author: This can be considered as a task that can be split, but I don't see a reason why this needs a separate doc, maybe we can open an issue and discuss more details there!

Reviewer: > This can be considered as a task that can be split, but I don't see a reason why this needs a separate doc, maybe we can open an issue and discuss more details there!

No, same controller should not watch for an event and also do periodic checks for another event.

Author: 1) If the event is currently being handled, just cancel the periodic check.
2) If the event comes while periodic check is ongoing, just abort the periodic check and restart the healer check again!

Author: As discussed lets work on one at a time, may be will target the periodic healer triggers later

> * The healer controller periodically triggers the health status checks of the CSI volumes via the gRPC calls.

Reviewer 2: I do not think a regular check is needed, you refer to https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/external-health-monitor/ for that in the top of the document

## CSI-Addons side-car

> * The side-car registers itself by creating a `CSIAddonsNode` CR that the CSI-Addons Controller can use to connect to the side-car and execute operations.

Reviewer 2: no need to go through the existing steps of CSIAddonsNode, that was a different feature, just refer to the doc

* When a nodeplugin container is restarted the side-car will update/create(if not present) [CSIAddonsNode](https://github.com/csi-addons/kubernetes-csi-addons/blob/main/api/v1alpha1/csiaddonsnode_types.go) object.
* The side-car works as relay, upon receiving a gRPC call from healer controller, the CSI-Addons side-car will then check volume's mounting conditions collected via the CSI NodeGetVolumeStats RPC.

> * In case if any volume condition is reported abnormal, the CSI-Addons side-car will act on it, it does some internal operation like fetching secrets, constructing staging path and finally sends NodeStageVolume request to the CSI driver and finally returns back the response to the controller.

Reviewer: Just sent a heal call to csidriver and let it decide whether node stage req is required or not.

Author: I know it looks simple but, I think this needs more cycles for fetching secrets, formatting the staging path, and capturing/collecting more details needed to make the NodeStageCall(), for almost all the volume even if they are healthy.

Reviewer: > I know it looks simple but, I think this needs more cycles for fetching secrets, formatting the staging path, and capturing/collecting more details needed to make the NodeStageCall(), for almost all the volume even if they are healthy.

sidecar is just a relay, 
its better to have more api calls in single request flow from controller to sidecar to csidriver
than to have back and forth between sidecar and csi-driver while controller sits waiting.

Author: I agree that this is a bit debatable topic on its own.
1. For restart of the nodeplugin case, it will mostly need NodeStageVolume() for 100% of PVs
2. For periodic checks, I'm optimistic that most of the time the health of the volume is in a good state, only the corner cases are process restarts (considering userspace mounters). Hence I think sending NodeStageVolume() all the time is a bit costly.

So maybe a hybrid model is needed to satisfy and save some jiffies here, like
* For restart case send a NodeStageVolume()
* For periodic health checks scenarios, send a NodeGetVolumeStats() first and then send a NodeStageVolume() if the status of the PV is set to abnormal?

Reviewer 2: CSI-Addons can not send CSI commands, those are reserved for the CO.

CSI-drivers can decide on their own implementation of healing, maybe they want to call their own NodeStageVolume procedure. Don't mix standard CSI procedures with CSI-Addons procedures.

There is a difference between regular health checks, and an informational message "you restarted, and you should make sure the volume is still available". The last part is expected when a CSIAddonsNode is detected, the 1st is for https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/external-health-monitor/

Author: For now, as we are focusing on restarting node plugin case, we might want to fill in all details in one shot and send. As discussed for periodic healing we might need some kind of a hybrid model to reduce the cycles involved in collecting details which might be unneeded in most of the times

Author: > CSI-Addons can not send CSI commands, those are reserved for the CO.

@nixpanic We wanted to send NodeGetVolumeStats() to check the volume condition, why not NodeStageVolume() ?

Author: I was thinking we can implement a function like HealVolume() that can be called from sidecar which does NodeGetVolumeStats() and  Heal() in one go, as @Rakshith-R pointed above

Reviewer 2: A function like `HealVolume()` would need implementation in the CSI-driver (called from the sidecar). CSI-drivers needs to handle healing differently, I expect.

`NodeGetVolumeStats()` is a CSI call, so can not be called from CSI-Addons operations. You need to design an operation that the CSI-Addons sidecar can call on the CSI-driver. The design for `Heal()` and a `HealthCheck()` function need to go to csi-addons/spec.

Author: > A function like HealVolume() would need implementation in the CSI-driver (called from the sidecar). CSI-drivers needs to handle healing differently, I expect.

Yes

>NodeGetVolumeStats() is a CSI call, so can not be called from CSI-Addons operations. You need to design an operation that the CSI-Addons sidecar can call on the CSI-driver. The design for Heal() and a HealthCheck() function need to go to csi-addons/spec.

@nixpanic 
 oh! sorry if that confused you, I now understand why we do not want to use NodeGetVolumeStats() served by the CSI driver which was for CSI Spec. I mean NodeGetVolumeStats() RPC is also served by CSI-addons server. Do we see any reason why we do not want to use the same RPC signature logically? do you think it just creates some additional confusion? if so we can just name it NodeGetVolumeStatus().

Author: Or maybe I will just have the new RPC naming it as NodeGetVolumeStatus() which is mostly a copy of NodeGetVolumeStats()

Author: > The design for Heal() and a HealthCheck() function need to go to csi-addons/spec.

@nixpanic I expect I will have more clarity on Heal() and a HealthCheck() functions while I work on this RFE, so I hope to start on the draft implementation first and then send a PR to csi-addons/spec, only after the spec gets merged I will send the actual controller PR.

Hope that won't hurt.

> PS: Some modification might be required in side-car to update the `CSIAddonsNode` object if its already present and its minimal change.

Reviewer: discard above comment regarding the same :sweat_smile:

> PS: Some modification might be required in side-car to update the `CSIAddonsNode` object if its already present and its minimal change.

Reviewer 2: not sure what you mean by this?

Author: Soon after the sidecar is restarted, if it sees `CSIAddonsNode` exist, we need to implement a way to update the already existing `CSIAddonsNode` object.

Reviewer 2: that should be handled by the CSIAddonsNode feature, it is not relevant enough to mention here

I think you are concerned that the CSI-driver container in the pod restarted, and not the pod was re-created. Only in that case, the CSIAddonsNode object would exist. It is not clear to me if this is something that can happen in reality.

# Introduction
There is [external health monitoring](https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/external-health-monitor/) which does mostly similar stuff, but actions are not in the scope of it, all it can do is log the health condition of the mounts.

# Volume Healer Controller

**Now the obvious question we expect is "what do we achieve with the new controller?"**
* Achieve a way to monitor the health of volumes.

> * Ceph-CSI has healer component which take cares of restarting the userspace processes when the node plugin is restarted, but in many places it uses Kubernetes specific code, with this controller model we are moving out the Kubernetes specific code out, and help make Ceph-CSI orchestrator independent.

Reviewer 3: cephcsi name is not required here as its a general component.

Author: I'm convinced with a comment by Niels earlier:

```
I think you are concerned that the CSI-driver container in the pod restarted, and not the pod was re-created.
Only in that case, the CSIAddonsNode object would exist. It is not clear to me if this is something that can happen in reality.
``

            |  '------------'        '------------'  |
            | CSI-driver Pod                         |
            '----------------------------------------'

## CSI-Addons Healer Controller
* The healer controller will be implemented as part of the CSI-Addons controller. It will trigger controller RPC to check the health condition of the CSI volumes.
* Watch for the `CSIAddonsNode` object, if the object is created/modified by the side-car do below operations
    * Once the connection is established, fetch the capabilities list and check for nodes that supports `VOLUME_HEALER` capability
    * Fetch all the VolumeAttachment` list
    * Filter the `VolumeAttachment` list through matching driver name, node name and status attached
    * For each `VolumeAttachment` get the respective PersistentVolume information and check the criteria of PersistentVolume Bound (also we can have configuration options like mounter type)
    * Send the RPC request for side-car to check if the volume is healthy along with the PersistentVolume details and may attempt to heal the volume if it is found abnormal
    * Log the final response returned from the side-car

## CSI-Addons side-car

> * When a nodeplugin pod is restarted the side-car will create [CSIAddonsNode](https://github.com/csi-addons/kubernetes-csi-addons/blob/main/api/v1alpha1/csiaddonsnode_types.go) object.

Reviewer 3: will create or update the object as per https://github.com/csi-addons/kubernetes-csi-addons/blob/57ed4f6211c0847eecead1d6f7baaee15f8e356d/sidecar/internal/csiaddonsnode/csiaddonsnode.go#L135-L138?

Author: I'm convinced with a comment by Niels earlier:

```
I think you are concerned that the CSI-driver container in the pod restarted, and not the pod was re-created.
Only in that case, the CSIAddonsNode object would exist. It is not clear to me if this is something that can happen in reality.
```

Reviewer 3: if the objects already exist there should be an update operation to let the controller know that sidecar is restarted. am missing this point.

Author: @Madhu-1 
As far as I understand from Niels previous comments, the object will be existing only when the container is restarted and it will be absent when the whole pod is restarted. If that is the case, when do we expect the container to restart, practically? Hence is it worth mentioning it here?

Reviewer 3: Yes, correct i don't have a practical answer for this one either. i was thinking object update might help which is not present currently.

Author: let's take it later? maybe based on future discussions?

> * The side-car works as relay, upon receiving a gRPC call from healer controller, the CSI-Addons side-car will then send a VolumeMonitor request to CSI driver. The request contains some internal details like secrets, staging path, volume-id etc.

Reviewer 3: `gRPC` to `RPC` as we have used RPC in many places?
